Community Is Core
=================

- The technology is only one part
- community is key
- Open by default
- project should be easily forked (entirely)

Community types
===============

user community
--------------
- essential for QA work, and supporting the users

- depends totally on the core contributor community

Contributor community
---------------------
- should be 100% open.

- 'bus factor' should be ZERO.

- Anyone should be able to fork and re-do everything we've done to this point.

- This gains trust

  * which means more contributors
  * which means more users
  * which means better support

how manage contributors
=======================
- very easy to sign up.

- list of stuff to work on for beginners

- low barrier of entry

  * currently github account, koji account, ssh pubkey

- source control is key "patches welcome" 

  * github fork and pull-requests are execelent way to audit newcomers into the "ring of trust"

- communication is key

  * project to many (twitter/identica/the like)

  * many to many (mailing list, IRC)

  * many to project (bugtracker, documentation wiki, 

how to run^H^H^Hignore infrastructure
=====================================
- yes need to eat own dogfood (builders, koji, etc)

- however infrastructure is a big tech debt to a linux distro project.

- leverage existing non-core infrastructure providers *github* *google groups*

  * make sure there's a method for extracting the data (data lberation)

  * non-core meaning anything not *DIRECTLY* related to re-building the upstream

introducing the GOOSE project
=============================
- github page
- mailing list
- irc server
- web site -- move to github pages?
- where are we?
- where are we going?
- what's in our way?
- "how you can help"
- when we expect to be done.
